[Music]
look up in the sky it's a bird it's a
plane
well almost right now there are about
10,000 planes carrying almost one and a
half million people from one point to
another but once you're on the plane and
look out the window it seems as if your
aircraft is the only one dashing across
the sky the sky may seem deserted but
it's just an illusion planes can't just
fly wherever they want they need to
follow special routes these routes are
more or less the same for all aircraft
and during your flight several other
planes are likely soaring nearby so
where is everybody oh they're there all
right just not right there for one thing
your field of vision is limited by the
small window that only allows you to
look out one side of the plane even if
another airliner was flying along the
same path you wouldn't notice it from
your seat pilots on the other hand have
a massive windshield and can see other
planes flying in front of them from the
cockpit but if another jet is traveling
behind below or above even the pilots
won't be able to spot it with their own
eyes the number of planes in the air is
impressive
but the sky is big that's why aircraft
don't need to fly side by side or even
close enough for you to see them from
your window white against the clouds
airplanes are also difficult to spot
they look like tiny dots and your eyes
must be expertly trained and notice a
dot that small your neighbor might have
eyes trained so well but we'll meet
those special passengers a bit later for
now most travelers don't want to waste
their time staring at a seemingly empty
sky or maybe they do how do you usually
pass the time on a long flight let me
know down in the comments bad weather
and clouds are another issue here at
night though it's easier to notice other
aircraft thanks to the flashy lights
they're decorated with so if you're
looking to spot a fellow jet up there
your chances are better after the Sun
Goes Down
what about when two airplanes are
approaching and passing each other well
both are moving at a breakneck speed of
around 500 miles per hour so you need to
look out the window at a very precise
moment to notice the other aircraft
blink and you'll miss it but the main
reason you don't see many airliners
while flying is also why planes don't
meet and collide with each other in the
sky and it's aircraft separation that's
a set of rules that help keep airplanes
away from each other
now plane nearby no risk of a collision
by the way
separation can also refer to other
obstacles and even a country's airspace
pilots know which airspace blocks they
can fly through before entering a new
block they must get permission from a
controller when a smaller plane is
traveling behind another much larger one
it's likely to experience wake
turbulence this kind of turbulence is
mostly created by the bigger aircrafts
wings
thanks to separation the risk of
collision becomes minimal and smaller
planes aren't affected by wake
turbulence now there's a popular
misconception that only air traffic
controllers are responsible for keeping
airplanes away from one another the FAA
states that every pilot is also in
charge of avoiding wake turbulence and
keeping the necessary distance from
another jet an airplane size means a lot
as well big commercial airliners are
mostly operated with the help of special
equipment it allows them to fly in
different weather conditions at night
and when visibility is low like in
clouds a lot of small private aircraft
don't have these special instruments and
pilots operate their planes mostly when
the weather is clear besides listening
to air traffic controllers these pilots
have to rely on their sight meaning they
can only see where their plane is going
when visibility is good aircraft
separation can be vertical when one
plane is flying over the other and
horizontal when two are flying
side-by-side if two aircraft are flying
below the cruising altitude of 29,000
feet one of them shouldn't get
vertically closer than 1,000 feet to the
other if the distance from the surface
is more than that the planes have to
keep a vertical distance of 2,000 feet
pilots can only break this rule if
there's a necessary
a horizontal separation between them the
rule is there must be about six
horizontal miles between two airliners
flying at the same altitude in regions
with poor radar coverage the distance
between planes must be more than 11
miles if it's happening in an airport's
airspace separation can be smaller three
and a half miles at the airport for
example during taxiing landing or
takeoff airplanes get pretty close to
one another the main rule is to keep a
safe distance between jets it sounds
like a lot to remember I know but don't
worry we have computers to help us with
that most modern planes with more than
10 seats are equipped with a tks
which stands for traffic collision
avoidance system its main task is to
warn a pilot if another aircraft is
coming close at the same altitude the
equipment calculates the time it'll take
the other plane to get so close that a
collision may happen when this time
starts to run out the system starts
making shrill warning sounds the T cache
shows a map with aircraft traveling
nearby some systems have a separate
monitor for that some display the map on
other screens like weather radars on the
map pilots can see their own planes at
the bottom of the screen airliners that
are far away and harmless look like
empty diamonds when one of the planes
approach is closer than six miles
horizontally or 1,200 feet vertically
its diamond gets filled any closer than
that and the diamond turns into an Amber
dot and an automated voice starts saying
urgently traffic traffic a pilot must
react so that the yellow dot doesn't
become red if an airplane has more than
30 seats it's supposed to have an
advanced tks
to systems of this kind installed on
different planes communicate with each
other and coordinate the Jets so that
they can avoid a collision
in this case one pilot will hear climb
climb coming from their system while the
other tks will tell its pilot descend
this
before the early 90s very few aircraft
had any equipment that could help
prevent collisions pilots had to rely on
their own eyes and air traffic
controllers early versions of the tcats
were pricing and since they had to be
installed on every plane imagine the
money airlines had to pay to renovate
all their jets but the obvious need to
prevent mid-air collisions settled the
matter once and for all
every plane needed a tea cast whatever
the cause get this most passengers might
not notice any other airplanes out the
window but pilots riding as passengers
do they're trained eyes can easily spot
nearby jazz but that's not the only
thing they pay attention to if their
view isn't clear enough because of the
ice that's accumulated on the windowpane
it's a red flag in cold weather snow and
ice are removed from an airplane before
the flight then the aircraft gets coated
with a special substance that prevents
ice buildup when the planes in the air
this substance works for some time but
several hours into your flight you may
notice that your window is covered with
a light layer of frost again that's
normal since the temperatures outside
your plane are freezing but if there's a
thick coat of ice covering the window
panes it could mean that the engines
aren't generating enough heat an
airplane covered with ice may have
serious flying and landing problems the
ice disrupts the smooth airflow and
reduces the lift that keeps a plane in
the air
so if you can't see other jets in the
sky because of the thick ice on your
window it's something worth mentioning
to the crew but they probably already
know and have started taking the
necessary steps to keep you and
everybody else onboard safe by the way I
heard that pilots are trying to get
another system in their flight decks
called an e cough that stands for empty
coffee avoidance system yep if their
coffee cups get too low the alert sounds
refill refill hey if you learn something
new today then give the video a like and
share with a friend
even that bad joke and here are some
other videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life